---
sectionid: cmnTstamp
title: "Timestamps and Durations"
version: "v3"
---

MEI offers multiple ways of defining onsets and offsets of timed musical events such as notes and slurs. The most common and most musician-friendly approach to this is through the use of a combination of the attributes **@tstamp** and **@dur**, which are made available by the attribute classes {% include link att="timestamp.musical" %} (inherited by {% include link att="controlevent" %}) and {% include link att="duration.musical" %}, both from the shared module.

The timestamp (**@tstamp**) of a musical event is calculated in relation to the meter of the current measure and resembles the so-called ‘beat’. In a common time measure with four quarter notes, the timestamp of each quarter equals its beat position in the measure: The first quarter has a timestamp of 1, the second has a timestamp of 2, and so on. MEI defines the value of **@tstamp** as a real number; the second eighth note position in a measure would thus be represented by the value of "1.5". The range of possible values is defined as starting with zero and ending with the number of metrical units in a measure (the ‘numerator’ in a time signature) + 1. This allows the capture of all graphical positions starting from the left barline ('0') and ending with the right barline of the measure ('5', in the case of 4/4 time).

For expressing durations, MEI offers the **@dur** attribute. This attribute is described in section {% include link id="cmnNotesBasic" %}.

For ‘spanning’ elements like slurs, which are members of the {% include link model="controleventLike" %} class, it is often more intuitive to record two timestamps – one for the onset of the event and one for its termination. Because the termination of the event may be in a succeeding measure, the second timestamp (**@tstamp2**) has a slightly different datatype than the one marking the initiation of the event. Its datatype is constrained to values following the formula "xm+y", where x is the number of full measures that this particular feature lasts (or the number of bar lines crossed) and y is the timestamp in the target measure where the feature ends. The timestamp is expressed using the same logic as described above. For example, a value of "0m+3" in 4/4 time indicates that the element bearing this attribute, a slur for example, ends on beat 3 of the same measure where it started. A value of "1m+1.5" would indicate an end on the second eighth note of the following measure. In 6/8 time, the value "2m+3" means that the feature ends two measures later on the third eighth note.
